welcome to the ultimate typescript
course in this course i'm going to teach
you everything you need to know about
typescript from the basics to more
advanced concepts so by the end of this
course you'll be able to use typescript
to build large-scale applications if
you're looking for a comprehensive easy
to follow well organized and practical
course that takes you from zero to hero
this is the right typescript course for
you everything you need to know about
typescript is in one place so you don't
need to jump back and forth between
random tutorials i'm mush hamidani and
i've taught millions of people how to
advance their software engineering
skills through my youtube channel and
online school codewoodmosh.com if you're
new here be sure to subscribe as we
upload new videos all the time now let's
jump in and get started
[Music]
to take this course you need to know
typescript now that was a joke you don't
need any familiarity with typescript as
i'm going to cover everything from
scratch but because typescript is built
on top of javascript you need basic
familiarity with javascript concepts
such as variables and constants arrays
objects functions arrow functions
destructuring and so on if you need to
refresh the basics i have a bunch of
tutorials and comprehensive courses you
can take i've put the links down below
in case you are interested
[Music]
so assuming that you're the right
student for this course now let's talk
about how you should take this course
first and foremost i want you to watch
this entire course all the way from the
beginning to the end because every
lesson teaches you something new if you
have taken any of my other courses
before you know that i don't waste your
time with repetitive or useless stuff so
make sure to watch every lesson now
while watching each lesson i want you to
take notes you can just write down some
keywords on a piece of paper if you
don't want to write a lot of notes i
strongly believe that the act of writing
things down will help you remember new
things that you learn now when you get
to the end of each section make sure to
do all the exercises i've carefully
designed these exercises to help you
better understand and remember the
materials remember the more you practice
the better you'll be at typescript or
coding in general
welcome to the first section of the
ultimate typescript course
we're going to start this section with a
quick introduction about typescript
we're going to talk about what it is why
we use it and when then we're going to
set up our development environment and
create our first typescript program next
we'll talk about configuring the
typescript compiler and we'll finish
this section by talking about debugging
typescript applications so let's jump in
and get started
[Music]
let's start by talking about the top
three questions people ask about
typescript what is typescript why do we
need it and how is it different from
plain or vanilla javascript well
typescript is a programming language
created at microsoft to address some of
the shortcomings of javascript you can
think of it like the brother or sister
of javascript javascript is like a kid
without any discipline who does whatever
he or she wants typescript on the other
hand is like a kid with some discipline
now technically speaking typescript is a
programming language built on top of
javascript so every javascript file is a
valid typescript file but typescript
adds some really cool features to
javascript that help us build more
robust and maintainable applications in
less time the most important feature
typescript offers is static typing what
does that mean well we have two types of
programming languages statically typed
and dynamically typed languages
in statically typed languages like c
plus plus c sharp and java we know the
type of variables at compile time or
while coding for example we can declare
a variable of type integer and this
variable can only hold integer values
nothing else so we cannot set it to a
string or another type of object
in dynamically typed languages like
javascript python and ruby the type of
variables is dynamic so it's determined
at runtime and it can also change so we
can declare a variable
set it to a number and then later on
change it to a string
so this variable does not have a fixed
or a static type the type is determined
and may change at runtime now this is
great and gives us a lot of flexibility
but it can also lead to problems what if
we pass this variable to a function that
expects a number then our application
might misbehave or crash now the problem
is that we will not know about these
issues until we run our application or
our unit tests well assuming that we
have them in place
so we have to test every function with
various edge cases to cache these bugs
and this is the problem that typescript
tries to solve
typescript is essentially javascript
with type checking with typescript we
explicitly set the type of our variables
upon declaration just like how we code
in statically typed languages
then we pass our code to the typescript
compiler and the compiler will tell us
if we are doing something wrong so we
can catch a lot of our mistakes at
compile time so if we declare a variable
as a number we cannot set it to a string
the typescript compiler is going to stop
us right there and this happens at
compile time so we don't have to run our
application or our unit tests and test
every piece of code to cache these
errors we can catch a lot of them simply
by compiling our application okay but
typescript is more than just type
checking most code editors these days
have great support for typescript so
they can detect the type of our
variables and offer productivity
boosting features like code completion
and refactoring also typescript includes
additional features that help us write
cleaner and more concise code now over
time these features get added to
javascript but because we have various
browsers and runtime environments for
executing javascript code it takes some
time until these features are
implemented in various browsers so by
coding in typescript we can use the
features of future javascript
so in a nutshell typescript is built on
top of javascript and we can use it
wherever we use javascript on the front
end or the back end so anything we can
do with javascript we can also do with
typescript now all these great benefits
aside let's talk about the drawbacks of
typescript first with typescript there
is always a compilation step involved
because at this time browsers don't
understand typescript code
so we have to give our code to the
typescript compiler to compile and
translate into javascript this process
is called transpilation
second with typescript we have to be a
bit more disciplined when writing code
so if you're a lazy programmer like our
famous old john smith and want to get
things done quickly you may feel
typescript is getting in the way and
that's true but if you're working on a
large project with multiple developers
you would end up wasting more time
coding in vanilla javascript and
catching those nasty bugs so then you
really want to use typescript for simple
applications you can totally get back to
old vanilla javascript if that's what
you prefer
alright that's all about typescript next
we're going to set up our development
environment
[Music]
all right the first thing we need is
node because we're going to use node
package manager or npm to install the
typescript compiler i believe as a
student of this course you should have
node on your machine but if not head
over to nodejs.org and download the
latest version over here
once you do that then open a terminal
window and run npm that is short for
note package manager which we're going
to use for installing third-party
packages in this case typescript then we
type i that is short for install
dash g for installing this globally so
we can access the typescript compiler in
every folder and then we type the name
of the package typescript
now if you're on mac or linux and you
get a permission error while running
this command you have to prefix it with
sudo or sudo well more accurately this
is sudo because it's short for super
user do but that aside let's go ahead
and install the typescript compiler
okay great now to verify our
installation we type tsc that is
shortboard typescript compiler dash v to
get the version
so here i'm running typescript version
4.6.3
you might install a newer version but
don't worry because everything i'm going
to teach you here will apply to newer
typescript compilers now in this course
just like my other courses i'm going to
use visual studio code or vs code as my
code editor you're welcome to use any
editor you prefer but if you want to
follow along and use some of the
shortcuts i'm going to teach you i
highly encourage you to use vs code in
case you don't have it you can get it
from
code.visualstudio.com alright so go
ahead and set up your development
environment because in the next lesson
we're going to write our first
typescript program
[Music]
all right now i'm going to go to my
desktop folder
and create a new folder for our project
called hello dash world you can call it
anything you want and you can put it
anywhere on your machine
now let's go into this folder
and open it with vs code so we type code
period
now if this doesn't work on your machine
you can simply drag and drop this folder
onto vs code
okay so here's our project now let's add
a new file here called index.ts
so every typescript file should have the
ts extension
now earlier i told you that typescript
is built on top of javascript so we say
typescript is a supersort of javascript
which means it has everything in
javascript plus some additional features
so here we can write any javascript code
and that is valid typescript code so we
can write console.log
and print hello world
now we can go back to our terminal
window here
or we can use the embedded terminal
window in vs code so back in vs code
under the view menu look we have
terminal the shortcut on mac is control
and backtick
so
we can open
the terminal window right here
and using typescript compiler we can
compile index.ts
okay
now let's open our project folder
look we have index.js
which is the result of compilation so we
have the exact same code here because in
index.ts we haven't used any typescript
features so let's write a bit of
typescript code
so
here in index.ts i'm going to declare a
variable using the let keyword i'm going
to call it h
and annotate it with number so by typing
a colon followed by the type of variable
we can annotate or explain a variable
now we can initialize it to let's say
20. now here's the beautiful part
because we have declared age as a number
we cannot set it to a string
or another type of object look
we get this error right here
it's saying type string is not
assignable to type number this is the
beauty of using typescript with
typescript we can catch a lot of our
mistakes at compile time we don't have
to run our application or our unit tests
to find that we accidentally set a
number to a string so let's remove this
bad line and recompile our file
so back to the terminal tsc index.js
good
now take a look over here
look at the javascript code that the
typescript compiler generated
so instead of the let keyword here we
have var because by default the
typescript compiler uses an older
version of javascript called es5 which
is short for ecmascript 5. so ecmoscript
is a standard or a specification while
javascript is an implementation of that
specification
so es5 is an old specification it's been
around for a long time and all these
features have been implemented in our
browsers for a very very long time i
think more than a decade now in the next
lesson i'm going to show you how to
configure the typescript compiler to
target a newer javascript version so the
code that will be generated would be
more modern
so here's the interesting part instead
of let we're using var and we don't have
our type annotation this is purely for
the typescript compiler
the actual javascript code doesn't
specify the type of this variable okay
so that's it for now starting from the
next section we're going to explore
typescript features in detail
next i'm going to show you how to
configure the typescript compiler
[Music]
all right let's talk about creating a
configuration file for the typescript
compiler
so here in the terminal we run tsc
double hyphen in it
so this created a configuration file
called
tsconfig.json with these settings
so let's close the terminal window and
open ts config right here so in this
file we have a number of settings and as
you can see most of these are commented
out by default we're only going to use a
handful of them so don't be intimidated
by all these settings you don't have to
learn all of them in fact nobody knows
all of them i don't know all of them
either now in case you're curious in
front of each setting you can see a
description of what that setting is for
so let's talk about a few of them in
this lesson the first one is target
which specifies the version of
javascript that the typescript compiler
is going to generate so this is set to
es 2016 which is an old standard and
it's been implemented in all browsers
out there now depending on where you
want to deploy your application you can
use a higher target and that often
results in shorter and less concise code
so if we remove this value and press
ctrl and space we can see all valid
values so we have yes 2015 16 17 18 and
so on now in this lesson i'm going to
leave this at yes 2016 because this is
the safest option for all browser
applications out there but again
depending on where you want to deploy
your application and how much of older
browsers you want to support you can use
a higher target
now the next setting we have here is
module which is set to common js we'll
talk about this setting later in the
course where we talk about modules now
in this section in the module section we
have a setting called there which
specifies the directory that contains
our source files so let's remove the
comment by pressing command and slash on
mac or ctrl n slash on windows
so this is set to period slash which
represents the current folder now by
convention we often put our source code
into a separate folder
so back to our project panel let's
create a new folder here called src
and then move index.ts right here okay
now i'm going to delete index.js we
don't need it for now okay
so now we're going to change router to
period slash source
now we have a similar setting here
under the emit section that setting is
called outer
and this specifies the directory that
will contain our javascript files
so let's enable this and change it to
dist so when we compile our code using
the typescript compiler our javascript
files are going to be stored in this or
distributable folder okay
now here we have another useful setting
called remove comments so
if we enable this the typescript
compiler is going to remove all the
comments that we add in our typescript
code so the generated javascript code is
going to be shorter okay
now another useful setting in this
section is no emit on error so by
default when we compile our code even if
you have errors in our code the
typescript compiler will still generate
javascript files this is probably not
what we want so the best option is to
always enable this setting so if you
have any mistakes in our code the
typescript compiler is not going to
generate any javascript files okay
now with this configuration file in
place
now we can go back to the terminal and
compile our code simply by running tsc
without any arguments so we don't have
to type index.ts
we just run tse and this will compile
all typescript files in this project
take a look all right
now we have a new folder called disk
that contains our javascript file
so this was the basics of ts config as
we go through the course we'll explore
more of this useful settings
[Music]
all right now let's see how we can debug
our typescript applications in vs code
this is very useful when things go wrong
and our code doesn't work as expected so
we can run our code line by line and see
what exactly happens under the hood
there are a few steps we need to follow
first we go to tsconfig.json
and here in the emit section we enable
the source map feature so a source map
is a file that specifies how each line
of our typescript code maps to the
generated javascript code let me show
you
so back to the terminal let's recompile
our code
good now
look into this folder we have a new file
called
index.js.map this is our source map
so if you look over here
you see some code that specifies how our
typescript code maps to our javascript
code now this is not for us to
understand this is for debuggers it's
for machines okay
so let's close this file
now
to make debugging more interesting let's
go to index.ts and write some logic we
can say if age
is less than 50
we're going to add 10 to it okay
now we're going to click on the first
line to insert a breakpoint so when we
start debugging the execution stops
right at this line at this breakpoint
from this point forward we can execute
our code line by line okay
now
we go to the debug panel
and click on create and launch the json
file
now from this drop down we select
node.js and this creates a new file
called launch.json in our project i'll
show you that in a second
so this is a json file with some
configuration that tells vs code how to
debug this application
so we're going to use node to launch
this program and here we have a label
called launch program which you will see
in a second
and we can see our program starts here
so in the source folder we have index.ts
and our output files are stored
in our workspace on our project in files
with the js extension
now here we need to add one more setting
it's called pre-launch task
we're going to set this to a string with
this value
tsc
colon space build space hyphen space
tsconfig.json
make sure to type this out exactly as i
have shown you here all these spaces
matter okay
so with this setting we are telling vs
code to use the typescript compiler to
build our application using this
configuration file okay
now
we go back to index.es and to start
debugging we can go to the debug panel
and click on launch program this is the
label that i just showed you now look at
the shortcut it's f5 i always prefer to
use shortcuts so let's start debugging
good now our program started and the
execution stopped right on this line at
this breakpoint now on the top we have a
bunch of tools for executing our code we
have step over for executing one line
we have step into we're stepping into a
function currently we don't have any
functions so it's not useful
we also have step out this is useful for
stepping out to the function we have
restart and stop
so in the tooltip that you see
in front of each tool you can see the
shortcut so the shortcut for stepping
over a line is f10 let's press that
so this line was executed
now on the left side
under variables
you can see all the variables that are
detected in this debugging session so
under local we have age that is set to
20. as we execute each line you'll see
the value of this variable getting
updated
now if there's something that you don't
see in the variables window you can go
to the watch window
and insert a watch so we're going to
watch the age variable current is 20. so
let's step over this line
now we're on this line so let's step
over this as well
now hcode updated but because our
program terminated we don't see its
value anymore but if you add one extra
line here
let's say console.log h
let's start the debugging session one
more time by pressing f5
now step over f10 f10 f10 and now h is
30. so this is debugging in via score
it's very useful when things go wrong we
can start our program and execute it
line by line
all right now that we're done with
debugging we can stop the debugging
session right here
so that brings us to the end of this
section starting from the next section
we're going to explore typescript in
detail
hey guys mosh here i just wanted to let
you know that this tutorial you have
been watching is actually the first hour
of my complete typescript course the
complete course is about 5 hours long
and goes way beyond this tutorial it
also comes with exercises and solutions
summary notes and cheat sheets a 30-day
money-back guarantee and a certificate
of completion you can add to your resume
so if you're serious about learning
typescript and are looking for a job as
a front-end or a back-end developer i
highly encourage you to enroll in the
course in case you're interested i'll
put the link in the description box and
if not that's totally fine let's move on
to the next lesson
welcome back to another section of the
ultimate typescript course in this
section we're going to explore the
fundamentals of typescript so you will
learn about the built-in types like the
any type arrays tuples enums functions
and objects the concepts you'll learn in
this section will be the foundation for
future sections so don't skip any
lessons now let's jump in and get
started
[Music]
so javascript has built-in types like
number string boolean null undefined an
object now typescript extends this list
and introduces new types like any
unknown never enum and tuple as we go
through this section you will learn
about all these steps in detail but
before we get started let's see how we
can play with primitive types in
typescript so back in index.ts i'm going
to delete all this code and declare a
variable called sales of type number
and set it to a value like one two three
four five six seven eight nine
so once again we're annotating or
explaining the type of the sales
variable using this syntax okay now in
typescript if you have a large number
we can separate its digits using an
underscore that makes our code more
readable okay
now let's also declare a variable called
course of type string and set it to
typescript
and one boolean called is published
now let me show you something really
cool in typescript we don't always have
to annotate our variables because the
typescript compiler can infer or detect
the type of our variables based on their
value for example because we have
initialized this variable to a number
the typescript compiler knows that this
variable is a number so we don't have to
annotate it so if we remove the
annotation
and hover our mouse over this variable
look we can see that sales is a number
similarly because we have initialized
course to a string we can remove the
annotation and once again
we can see that course is a string and
one more time
now what if we declare a variable like
level and don't initialize it
typescript assumes that this variable is
of type any we'll talk about that in the
next lesson
[Music]
in timescript we have a new type called
any which can represent any kind of
values
so if we declare a variable and don't
initialize it the typescript compiler
assumes this variable is of type any so
we can set it to a number and then later
on we can set it to a string
but this is against the whole idea of
using typescript because we use
typescript for type safety so we get
type checking so if we use the any type
we essentially lose that feature and the
major benefit of using typescript so as
a best practice you should avoid using
the any type as much as possible let's
look at another example let's say we
have a function called render
that takes a document and simply renders
it on the console
now look we have a compilation error
and the error is saying parameter
document implicitly has on any type
implicitly means we haven't explicitly
or clearly set the type of this
parameter so the compiler is inferring
or guessing the type of this parameter
and that's why we have this error now
let's say this is part of a javascript
project we're trying to convert to
typescript and at this point it's
impossible for us to explicitly annotate
this with a particular type so we have
to use the any type here now here we
have two options to turn off this error
one option is to annotate this with any
so we're telling the compiler hey i know
what i'm doing the document is of any
type but what if we have tons of errors
of this kind we don't want to go to
every function and explicitly annotate
various parameters with any
well there is a nuclear option for that
but i don't personally recommend that
but let me show you how that works
so let's remove the annotation
now if you're on mac press command and p
if you're on windows press ctrl and p to
bring up the search box and go to
tsconfig.json
now look in the type checking section
strict is turned on and this is
equivalent to turning on some of the
basic type checking features you will
learn about these settings as we go
through the course
now the first setting you see here is no
implicit any so let's remove the comment
so if this feature is turned on the
compiler will complain about implicit
any types
now let's turn this off and see what
happens so back in index.ts
the error is gone so use this with
caution only if you know what you're
doing otherwise there's really no point
using typescript because you will lose
the major benefits of typescript okay
so back to ts config i'm going to revert
this code
good so that's all about the any type
next we're going to talk about arrays
[Music]
all right let's talk about arrays
in javascript we can declare an array
like this
now the thing about javascript arrays is
that each element can be of different
type so here we can have two numbers
followed by a string
and this is totally valid javascript
code because javascript arrays are
dynamic so each element can be of
different type
but what if we pass this array to a
function that expects a list of numbers
then the third element is going to cause
some issue right this is where we use
typescript so we can explicitly apply a
type annotation here
and say numbers is a number array
now we see the error immediately at
compile time so let's fix it
good
now in this particular case we don't
even have to apply the type annotation
because every element in this list is a
number so if you remove the type
annotation
the compiler
can still infer or guess the type of
this variable great
but what if we had an empty array here
look
now the type of this variable is any
array which is something we should avoid
with any arrays again we can have a mix
of different types so the first element
can be a number
the second element can be of a different
type like a string or a boolean so if
you want to use an empty array you have
to explicitly apply a type annotation
here let's say number array
now the third line is invalid so let's
delete it
now let me show you another cool benefit
of using typescript and that is code
completion or intellisense so if we type
numbers that for each
and pass an arrow function here like n
goes to
and then type n period
over here we can see all the properties
and methods of number objects because
our editor knows the type of n it offers
code completion so we can see all the
methods of number objects this is very
useful it's a great productivity
boosting feature we don't get this with
plain javascript right
so that's another benefit of using
typescript that's all about the arrays
next we're going to talk about tuples
[Music]
typescript has a new type called topple
which is a fixed length array where each
element has a particular type we often
use them when working with a pair of
values for example let's say for each
user we want to represent two values an
id
and an a
so we declare a variable
and annotate it using a special syntax
like this first we add square brackets
and then tell the compiler that the
first element is going to be a number
whereas the second element is going to
be a string
and then we initialize our variable like
this
so we have a fixed length array with
exactly two elements nothing more
nothing less so if we add a third
element here we get a compilation error
saying type number string number is not
assignable to type number string okay so
exactly two elements and these elements
should have these types the first one
has to be a number so if we pass a
string again we get a compilation error
now just like before here we get
intellisense or code completion
so if we access the first element
we see all the methods of number objects
and if you access the second element we
see all the properties and methods of
string objects again one of the reasons
i love typescript
now one thing you need to know about
tuples is that internally they're
represented using plain javascript
arrays so if we compile our code we're
just going to see a regular javascript
array let me show you so in the terminal
let's run tsc
good
now back in our project here in this
folder let's open index.js look we just
have a regular javascript array so that
means back in our typescript code
if we type user period
over here we can see all the methods of
array objects
now one of this method is a little bit
troublesome and that is the push method
so we can call this method and store a
third value in this array and the
compiler is not going to complain here i
believe this is one of the gaps in
typescript at the time of recording this
hopefully this will be solved in the
future
so a tuple is a fixed length array where
each element has a particular type now
as a best practice i would say restrict
your tuples to only two values because
anything more than that is going to make
your code a bit hard to understand for
example if you add
a boolean
and another number here
what do these values really represent
it's really hard to tell
so tuples are useful when we have only
two values like key value pairs
next we're going to talk about enums
[Music]
typescript has another built-in type
called enum which represents a list of
related constants if you know c sharp or
java you have seen enums before we have
the exact same concept here in
typescript
so let's say we want to represent the
size of t-shirts as constants one way is
to define three constants like this
small
medium
and large
that's one way and then throughout our
code we can reference this constant
another way is to group this constant
inside an enum so we use the enum
keyword
then give our enum a name
now note that here i'm using pascal
naming convention so the first letter of
every word should be uppercase okay
then we add curly braces and inside the
braces we add our members small
medium and large once again i'm using
the pascal naming convention for the
members
now when we define an enum we don't need
to define these three constants anymore
and by default
the typescript compiler assigned the
first member the value of 0
and other members values like 1 2 and so
on now if you don't want to use these
values we can explicitly set values so
we can set small to 1 and then medium
becomes 2 and large becomes three we can
also use string values
like
s
if we do this then we have to explicitly
set a value for each member so
medium and
large like this now i'm going to revert
this code and just rely
on numbers so i'm going to initialize
small to 1 and rely on the compiler to
set the value for other members
so now that we have this new type we can
declare a variable like my size of type
size
and set it to size dot
medium okay
so this is how we can use enops now
let's see what happens
if we log
my size on the console so back to the
terminal let's run the typescript
compiler
good and then use node to execute our
javascript code so we go to the disk
folder and pick index.js
so look we see the numeric value
associated with our enum member okay
now let's look at the generated
javascript code in this file
so back to the project here's our index
file take a look
so the generated javascript code is
pretty verbose it's pretty lengthy now
you don't need to worry about
understanding this but let me show you a
trick
back to our typescript file
if we define this enum as constant the
compiler will generate a more optimized
code so let's recompile our code
and then look at
index.js
one more time
now we don't see all that code anymore
we only have one line for setting my
size to 2. again you don't have to worry
about the generated javascript code all
i want you to take away here is that
using an enum we can represent a list of
related constants and if we define our
in-apps using the constant keyword the
compiler will generate more optimized
code
next we're going to talk about functions
[Music]
let's talk about how typescript helps us
prevent common problems when working
with functions
so let's define a function
called calculate tags
and give it an income parameter of type
number
now let's hover our mouse over the
function name look at the type of the
return value it's void meaning this
function does not return a value
if you return a value here like a number
now
the type of the return value is number
so the typescript compiler has inferred
the type of the return value for us and
that's great but as a best practice we
should always properly annotate our
functions so all the parameters as well
as the return type should be properly
annotated especially if you're building
an api for other people to use
so in this case to annotate the return
type
we go after the list of parameters
add a colon and specify the return type
like number or void if we are not going
to return a value
so let's add number
now this has an extra benefit
if you forget to return a value or if
you return a different kind of value
like your string we get a compilation
error immediately so as best practice
always properly annotate your functions
now let's temporarily return zero
okay
look at the income parameter this is an
unused parameter now we have a compiler
option for detecting these unused
parameters
so let's go back to our ts config file
in the type checking section
we have a compiler option called no
unused parameters we have to explicitly
turn this on because this setting is not
part of strict setting now back to
index.ts
look
we have a warning saying
income is declared but its value is
never read so let's change this code and
say if
income is less than 50 000
then we're going to return income times
1.2
now here we have another compilation
error
saying function lags ending return
statement and return type does not
include undefined it sounds a bit
cryptic but what this error is saying is
that if this condition is true we're
going to return a number otherwise as
you know javascript by default always
returns undefined from our functions and
undefined is not a number
now let me temporarily
remove the annotation for the return
type
look we have no compilation error but
this function has a problem
if the income is greater than 50 000
we're gonna get undefined from this
function and this may cause a bug in our
application the good news is that we
have another compiler option for
detecting these kind of issues where we
forget to return a value
so back to our ts config file again in
the type checking section
we have a setting called no implicit
returns
again we have to explicitly turn this on
because this is not part of the strict
setting okay
now
to factor code
we have a warning saying not all code
paths return a value so now we can fix
this problem
and say otherwise if income is greater
than 50 000 we're going to return income
times 1.3 but again it's best to always
annotate our functions properly to
prevent all these issues so we should
always return a number from this
function
now we have another useful compiler
setting for detecting unused variables
so if we declare a variable like x and
don't use it in this function this is
unused now using the typescript compiler
we can find these issues in our code
so
back to ts config
here is the setting no
unused locals with this feature enabled
now
back to our code we have a yellow
warning saying
x is declared but its value is never
read so
now we can delete this and make our code
cleaner
so this is the basics of functions now
let's add a second parameter here called
tax here of type
number
now we have a warning here saying
texture is declared but its value is
never read so let's change
our condition to
if tax year
is less than 2022 then return income
times 1.2
so now with these two parameters if you
want to call this function
we have to supply exactly two arguments
nothing more nothing less
so i'm going to pass 10 000 for the
income and 2022 for the tax year if you
add an extra argument here
we get a compilation error saying
expected two arguments but got three if
you have been coding in javascript for a
while you know that this is valid
javascript code so javascript doesn't
really care how many arguments we pass
to a function we can pass more or fewer
arguments than the number of parameters
but typescript is very strict about this
so here we should pass exactly two
arguments so let's remove that
but what if you want to make this
optional let's say in some places we
want to call this function without
supplying the tax year well we can make
this parameter optional by adding a
question mark right here
now we have a compilation error on this
line saying
object is possibly undefined
so if we don't supply the tax year by
default undefined will be used and we
cannot compare undefined with 2022.
so here we have two options one option
is to use the old javascript trick so we
wrap this in parenthesis
and then using the or operator we give
it a default value like 2022
so if we don't supply the tax year
this value will be used otherwise the
argument that we pass will be used here
okay now i don't like this approach
there is a better way we can give this a
default value so instead of making it
optional
we give it a default value
like this
now we can call this function with or
without a tax year if we don't supply an
argument for the tax year this value
will be used otherwise what we pass here
will overwrite
the default value okay
now
with this default value we no longer
need to use
this ugly expression we can simply
compare
tax year with 2022
so let's quickly recap what you learned
in this lesson as a best practice always
properly annotate your functions all the
parameters and return types and enable
these three compiler options
no unused locals no unused parameters
and no implicit returns
[Music]
all right the last thing we're going to
cover in this section is objects so
let's declare an employee object
with an id property
now you know that in javascript objects
are dynamic so their shape can change
throughout the lifetime of our programs
so once we have an employee object then
later we can give it a new property like
name and this is totally valid in
javascript but as you can see this is
not valid in typescript the compiler is
saying property name does not exist on
this type so this type is an object with
an id property which is a number
so just like all the variables we have
declared so far the typescript compiler
has inferred the shape of this employee
object
so if you hover our mouse over employee
we can see its shape it's an object with
an id that is a number
now just like all the variables we have
declared so far we can explicitly apply
a type annotation here
so after employee
we add a colon followed by braces and
inside the braces we define the
properties of an employee object so
every employee should have an id that is
a number
and a name that is a string
now the previous error on this line is
gone
but we have a new kind of error let's
find out
the compiler is saying property name is
missing so the reason we're seeing this
is because every employee should have
these two properties but while
initializing this object we haven't
supplied the name property now here we
have two options one option
is to set the name to an empty string we
cannot set it to null or undefined we'll
talk about this in the next section so
we should either set it to an empty
string
or we can make this property
optional and then we don't have to
supply the name property while
initializing an employee now even though
typescript allows us to do something
like this this is something we should
avoid because conceptually it doesn't
make sense to have an employee without a
name every employee should have a name
it would make sense to make the fax
property optional because not everyone
has a fax machine right so always make
sure the code you write conceptually
makes sense don't blindly use features
of typescript or any other programming
languages okay so in this case we're not
going to use an optional property and
that means we should either set the name
to an empty string or initialize it
right here okay now we have an error
because i used a period okay
so now we don't need this last line
anymore
okay
now sometimes we want to make certain
properties read only so we don't
accidentally change them later on so
with our current implementation we can
change the idea of an employee anytime
and this is not valid this is where we
use the read-only modifier so we applied
before the name of the property and now
the typescript compiler prevents us from
accidentally modifying the value of this
property okay
good now how can we define a function or
more accurately a method in this object
let's say every employee object should
have a retirement method so
in our type annotation we need to define
the signature of this method we need to
specify how many parameters it's going
to have what is the type of each
parameter and what is the type of the
return value
so we're going to have a retire method
with one parameter that is date now here
we use the arrow function syntax so
first we add parenthesis and inside
parenthesis we specify the parameters so
we're going to have a date parameter of
type date
this is just a built-in data object in
javascript and typescript so we only
have one parameter then we use a fat
arrow and here we specify the type of
the return value we don't want to return
any value so we're going to use weight
now we have a compilation error
saying property retire is missing
because when initializing this object we
haven't supplied
the retired method so let's do that real
quick
all right retirement is going to be a
method with one parameter
and
over here i just want to lock the date
on the console pretty simple
so this is how we can work with objects
now i know this syntax this type
annotation is a little bit messy it's
making our code a bit verbose or noisy
so in the next section i'll show you a
better way to work with objects
welcome back to another section of the
ultimate typescript course in this
section we're going to explore more
advanced types in typescript
so you will learn how to use type
aliases to reuse types and simplify your
code how to use unions and intersections
to combine types how to narrow types how
to work with nullables as well as the
unknown and never types so let's jump in
and get started
[Music]
alright so this is the employee object
that we created at the end of the
previous section now there are three
problems in this implementation the
first problem is that if you want to
create another employee object we have
to repeat this structure we have to
repeat this shape so we'll end up
duplicating our code which is bad we
always want to confirm to the dry
principle don't repeat yourself
now the second problem is that the other
employee object might have other
properties so these two employee objects
might not have a consistent shape
because we don't have a single place to
define the shape of an employee object
now the third problem is that overall
this structure is making our code a
little bit hard to read and understand
this is where we use a type alias using
a type alias we can define a custom type
let me show you
so on the top we start with the type
keyword then give our new type and name
and once again here we use the pascal
case so employee
with a capital e
then we set it to braces and inside the
braces we define all the properties and
methods an employee object should have
so i'm going to go in this annotation
select these three lines and by pressing
alt and up we can move these lines up
okay
now when defining this employee object
we annotate it with our new type
employee okay so now we have a single
place where we define the shape of an
employee object and we can reuse this in
multiple places this is the benefit of
using a type abs
[Music]
all right let's talk about union types
with union types we can give a variable
or a function parameter more than one
type so let's define a function for
converting weight from kilogram to
pounds
now we give it a parameter called weight
now let's assume that this parameter can
be either a number or a string so we
annotate it with number or string
so using a vertical bar we can create a
union type
now
we can call this function in two ways we
can give it a number
or
a string like 10 kilograms okay
now let's finish up this example so
we're going to annotate the return type
and return a number
now in this function at this point we
don't know if the weight is a number or
a string so if we type weight period we
only see the properties and methods that
are common between numbers and strings
so both numbers and strings have these
three methods to locale string to string
and value of so here we are not seeing
methods that are specific to numbers or
strings and this is where we use a
technique called narrowing so we're
going to narrow down this union type
into a more specific type so here we can
say if type of weight
equals
number
now in this block the compiler knows
that the weight is a number so if we
type weight period we see all the
methods that are available in number
objects
and by the way we don't necessarily need
the code blocks here in this line if you
have a one-liner and type weight period
we still see all the methods available
in numbers okay
so what are we going to do here we're
going to return weight times 2.2
otherwise
if you end up here that means weight as
a string so now we see all the
properties and methods of string objects
okay
so to finish this example
here we're going to return
first we need to convert the weight to
an integer so we call
parsend pass the weight
and then multiply it by 2.2
okay
now back to the terminal let's compile
our code and see what we get
all right we're going to go to index.js
take a look our union type is not part
of the generated javascript code it's
purely for the compiler to do is type
checking
[Music]
so in the previous lesson you learned
that using a union type we can say a
variable or a function parameter can be
one of many types right now we have
another technique for combining types
called intersection
so instead of a vertical bar
use an ampersand
and now this type represents an object
that is both a number and a string at
the same time now technically this is
impossible we cannot have an object that
is both a number and a string at the
same time so let's look at a more
realistic example
i'm going to use our type alias to
define a new custom type called
draggable so this represents an object
that can be dragged on the screen now
what properties or methods do we need in
a draggable object
well at least we need a method called
drag which takes no arguments and
returns void
now similarly we're going to define
another type called resizable
and here we need a resize method that
should take two parameters like the new
width and the new height but for
simplicity let's get rid of all that
noise and just add no parameters and say
this method returns void okay
so now we have two separate types and
using an intersection type we can
combine them into a new type so we can
define a new type called ui widget which
is draggable and resizable so this is an
intersection type
now with this type in place we can
declare a variable
called textbox
which is a ui widget
now to initialize this object we need to
implement all members of draggable and
resizable objects so we need to
implement the drag and resize methods
so
drag as a simple method
and so is the resize method
so this is type intersection in action
[Music]
sometimes we want to limit the values we
can assign to a variable this is where
we use literal types so let's declare a
variable called quantity and assume that
the quantity can either be 50 or 100 but
nothing else now here's the problem if
we annotate this with number
this can take any numbers any valid
numbers in javascript right so to limit
the values we can use here we use a
literal type so instead of annotating
this with the type like number
will annotate it with a literal meaning
an exact or specific value
so
i'm going to replace number with 50.
now quantity can only be set to 50
nothing else so if you set it to 51 you
get a compilation error now you might
think this is not useful well that's
true but what if we apply the union
operator here so we can say the quantity
can be 50 or 100. now we can set it to
50 or 100 right but we're not done yet
we can make this code even better so
instead of hard coding these literal
values here we can create a custom type
using a type alias so we define a new
type called quantity
which can be 50 or 100 and then we
annotate our variable with our new type
so what we have over here is called a
literal type
now literals don't have to be numbers
they can also be strings for example we
can define a new type called metric
which can be centimeter or
inch
okay
so that's all about literal types next
we're going to talk about nullable types
[Music]
all right let's talk about working with
null values so by default typescript is
very strict about using null and
undefined values because as you probably
know these values are common source of
bugs in their applications
so let's look at a real example let's
define a function
called greet that takes a name which is
a string
now in this function we just want to do
a console.log and print name the to
uppercase
now in vanilla javascript we can call
this function and accidentally give it
null or undefined that is totally valid
javascript code but when we run our
program our program is going to crash
because we cannot call this method on a
null or an undefined object so this is
why null and undefined values are a
common source of problems and that's why
by default the typescript compiler stops
us from using null or undefined values
so here we have an error saying argument
of type null is not assignable to
parameter of type string
let me show you where this comes from
so let's go to our ts config file
in the type checking section
we have a compiler option called strict
null checks that this is enabled by
default as part of the strict option
so if strict is set to true strict null
checks is also true but we can overwrite
it and turn off this feature
now
back to index.ts the error is gone so
this is why by default typescript is
very strict about using null values
so technically we should never use this
option we should never turn it off so
i'm going to rewrite this back
but what can we do in this function what
if we want to have the ability to use a
null value perhaps if we don't have a
name you want to print just a generic
message like hola meaning high in
spanish
so here we can say if name is truthy
meaning it has a value then we're going
to print name.to uppercase otherwise
if it's null or undefined we're gonna
print hola okay
but we cannot pass a null value here
this is where we use a union type once
again
so we annotate this parameter with
string or
no
now we can pass a null value but we
cannot pass undefined
because this is not a valid value for
this parameter so if you want to have
the ability to pass undefined as well
again we're going to use the union
operator
[Music]
now when working with nullable objects
we often have to do null checks for
example let's define a type alias called
customer
and give it a birthday property of type
date
now let's define a function for getting
a customer from a database so
we give it an id which is a number and
we get either a customer or
null in case there is no customer with
the given id
now in this function let's write some
basic logic like return if id equals
zero
then we return null otherwise we return
a customer object
with this birthday
pretty simple
now let's declare a variable
and here we call getcustomer and pass
zero
now let's imagine we want to print the
customer's birthday so console.log and
here we pass customer dot birthday
now here we have a compilation error
because customer might possibly be no
so as you know one way to solve this
problem is like this
we check if customer is not known then
we execute this piece of code
now let's take this to the next level
and assume that under certain
circumstances this function might return
undefined so we add undefined here
and now we have to expand this if
statement and check for undefined
so if customer is not null and it's not
undefined either
then we print the customer's birthday
that works but there is a simpler way to
write this code in typescript we can
remove
this if statement
and use what we call the optional
property access
operator
so because customer might be null or
undefined right after it we add a
question mark and then we add the
chaining or the dot operator so this
question mark followed by the chaining
operator is called the optional property
access operator so now this piece of
code gets executed only if we have a
customer that is not null or undefined
let's see this in action so we're
passing 0 and we get a null object so
if we execute this code
we get undefined so the result of this
expression is undefined but if we pass
one we get an actual customer object so
we'll see the customer's birthday
on the console
there you go okay so this is optional
property access operator now we can take
this to the next level let's make the
birthday property optional
now let's say we want to print the full
year
of the birth year so over here
we have to call dot
get
full year
now once again we have the same
compilation error because the birthday
property might possibly be undefined
once again to solve this problem we can
use the optional property access
operator so now this piece of code gets
executed only if you have a customer and
that customer has a birthday otherwise
the result of this expression is
undefined okay
now we also have
what we call
optional
element access operator and this is
useful when we are dealing with arrays
so we might have an area of customers
and we want to print the first customer
on the console now if this array is
going to be non or undefined of course
we have to check
if customers is not null and it's not
undefined
then we're going to access the first
element now this is where we can use the
optional element access operator so
before accessing this element
we use a question mark and a dot okay
now we also have
the optional call operator which has the
exact same syntax so let's imagine
we have a variable called log which is
going to reference a function
so for simplicity i'm going to annotate
this with any
and this might be set to a function
like a function that takes a message
and
prints that message on the console
or we might set this to
no
right
now let's say we want to call this
and pass some value if we run this
program our program is going to crash
because log is not so this is where we
can use the optional call operator so
this piece of code will get executed
only if log is referencing an actual
function otherwise we'll get undefined
hey guys mosh here i just wanted to let
you know that this tutorial you have
been watching is actually the first hour
of my complete typescript course the
complete course is about five hours long
and goes way beyond this tutorial it
also comes with exercises and solutions
summary notes and cheat sheets a 30-day
money-back guarantee and a certificate
of completion you can add your resume so
if you're serious about learning
typescript and are looking for a job as
a front-end or a back-end developer i
highly encourage you to enroll in the
course in case you're interested i'll
put the link in the description box
[Music]
you